Tonight's hostage
deal, which
Israel's cabinet
just approved a few minutes
ago, calls
for a four day pause
in Israeli military operations in Gaza.
Now, before the break,
Barack Ravid told us that his sources
say that military engagement
will not stop
until the first child hostage
crosses the border from Gaza into Israel.
CNN's Jeremy
Diamond is in southern Israel
at a vantage point
right near the Gaza border
and can see into Gaza
and has been watching much
of the fighting
over the last several days and weeks.
Jeremy, what are you hearing tonight?
Well, just as you were coming to me,
John, we heard the sound of outgoing
artillery and moments
after this deal was approved
by the Israeli government.
We heard several barrages
of outgoing artillery
in the direction of the Gaza Strip,
an indication that the military activity
by the Israeli
military will indeed continue
until this pause goes into effect
until those hostages
are released from Gaza.
So and also one clear point
that the Israeli prime
minister made this evening
was that even as he was
urging his cabinet to approve this deal,
he was also making clear
that the war will continue
after this pause ends.
We also need to be clear that
if you look at the past of this
Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
typically before
there is a cease fire, before
there is any kind of pause in fighting,
there is an uptick in military activity.
So we're very much here waiting
and watching for that possibility.
But, John,
I do also want to tell you
about a conversation
I just had with Gal Hirsch,
who is
the Israeli prime minister's
special coordinator for hostages.
You just told me moments ago about this
deal, about the discussions
in the cabinet meeting where he said that
only one,
only two ministers voted against
this proposed deal.
He said that
the finance minister, Smotrich,
who appeared
to be indicating his objections
to this deal,
actually ended up voting in favor of it.
And he also told me
that he delivered a message
just about a half hour ago
to the families
of some of these hostages, telling them
that the state of Israel
will do everything
to bring all of the hostages back home.
And he really did want to emphasize
that this deal
for 50 hostages in exchange
for a four day pause
in fighting,
as well as three Palestinian prisoners
for every civilian hostage
release from Gaza,
that this deal is only the first
phase of these negotiations.
He really wanted to emphasize
that the Israeli government's position
is that they want to get
all of the hostages back
and that this military campaign,
that these negotiations
will not end until that happens.
Jeremy, I am curious, you said the
the official with Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu said that they had
he had spoken
to the families of the hostages.
We had the granddaughter of one hostage
on about 20 minutes ago
and she said she's had no communication
whatsoever
from the prime minister's office.
So how is the prime minister, insofar
as we know, reaching out
Yes.
So this is Gal Hirsch.
He is the special coordinator
for hostages for the prime minister.
He didn't say exactly how,
but he said
he delivered a message
to the families of these hostages.
And what's also clear
is that,
you know,
they don't know yet exactly
which families of hostages
are going to see their loved ones
released. He would not get into that.
But I also think it was interesting
that when he was talking
about the 50 individuals
who will get out,
he said children and their mothers.
We have been reporting
that it would be children and women.
But I think it was really interesting
that he was specifying
that it would be children
and their mothers.
We know, of course, of multiple cases
of children
who are being held hostage in Gaza
and who were taken hostage
with their mothers as well.
And so that may give us
some indication of the families
that are most likely
to get out in this first round.
Of of hostage releases
over these four days
for those 50 different individuals.
That is perhaps an indication there.
All right.
Jeremy Diamond right on the border
between Israel and Gaza,
where artillery fire has continued
even after the deal has been reached.
Jeremy, thank you very much
for your reporting.
With me now
is Rami
Igarashi, former
chief of the Hostages
in MIA Unit of the Mossad
and retired U.S.
Army Major General James Spider
Marks, a CNN military analyst.
Rami, let me start with you.
You've been skeptical
of the possibility of this deal
as it was being negotiated
now that they have reached a deal.
What are your opinions on it?
This deal is
has been that has been negotiated
on the basis
that the Hamas wants a cease fire.
Hamas wants to be to be
saved from the Israeli military.
On the other hand,
the Israeli Israeli
military is determined
to eradicate the Hamas.
It is not something that we want to do
is something that we have to do.
There is no way that Israel can continue
living in any form with Hamas
over the border.
Now, this deal was reached
because of the Israeli
public opinion and the
the belief
that the moral duty
that the government has
is such that it is
it overrides
the main objective of this war.
And the main
objective of this war
is to eradicate the Hamas
It is a very, very bad deal
for Israel in many, many ways.
First of all, militarily,
it is not an easy deal.
How are they going
to restart the war in four or five days?
Secondly, we know that the Hamas is going
to play all kinds of tricks on the way,
trying to
to release this prison, less
kidnap personnel that
it has.
And and on the second hand,
it is not an easy deal
on the Israeli internal front.
Remember, there are families
that their loved ones
are not going to be released
and there are families
that have soldiers in the Gaza Strip
and they know of fighting in the Gaza
Strip in four days
time or in five days time.
Is going to be
a lot more difficult than it is
right now.
General Marks, we've talked about this.
What is the military impact
of a multiday pause
The primary impact
is that the IDF loses
targetable intelligence.
It starts to atrophy
the intelligence
that they've gathered
over the course of days
in Gaza begins to crumble around them
because over
this pause,
Hamas will resupply reposition,
do everything in their power
to increase their security.
And let there be no doubt
this is not being done by Hamas
for any humanitarian reasons.
This is a transaction to them.
And I think we're at the point
where the military
has got a very,
very tough decision to make.
You're in Gaza.
Excuse me. You're in Gaza.
You're exposed.
You've got Hamas all around.
You still active in the tunnel
network system.
It's not been completely taken over
by the Israelis. By any means.
And so these Israeli
soldiers are targets.
That's the challenge.
And then at the end
of a certain amount of time,
as has been described
that four days could turn into five or
six days.
If they continue to
to move hostages back across into Israel,
that becomes a very,
very tough military task.
The Israelis at that point
are going to have to transition
into a defensive posture, pause.
There's not a military term.
You attack or you defend.
They're going to have to start to defend.
That changes the mission set entirely.
This becomes a very,
very difficult
test for military commanders to execute.
Romney,
is there anything
that the Israeli military
or Israeli government can do?
What can they do
to make sure that Hamas lives
up to its side of the deal?
Hamas is not trustworthy.
As you can understand.
It's a terror group run by a psychopath,
and they're going to do anything
in their power
to kill Israeli soldiers and to continue
to continue
regrouping
and strengthening themselves as they can
But the Israeli army has already said
that if any breach of the agreement,
even the smallest breach.
It will go back into fighting full force,
saying that
I don't see
the Israeli military doing that.
If there's any more hostages to be had
and and and this is where we are.
We are at a very
we're a very difficult situation
where this deal is a bad deal.
But we have to
to go through it
in order to release our people.
And this is our moral obligation.
But I mean, don't forget,
I think at the end of the day,
difficult days
it might be at the end of the day,
the Israeli army will go back to fighting
and Israel
must achieve its goal
of eradicating Hamas.
Rami, Retired General James Spider Marks,
thank you both for being with us
very, very much.